The circuit works on two conditions - one is presence of light in its location and second is presence of human being, only when these two conditions are met, the controller turns the backup light ON.
These two conditions are tested by two sensors one is LDR and other is PIR Motion sensor module.
The LDR senses the presence of light and Motion sensor detects the presence of a human being in its range.


High Level Requirements


PIR Sensor is basically an IR (Infrared Receiver). It consists of sensitive IR receives which detects the IR (Infra Red) rays in its region.We know that every living organism emits IR rays and so the human body. Whenever a there is a human in the sensor module region it detects the presence of IR rays.

Whenever a human present in the sensing region of module, the sensor picks up IR changes as human body emits IR rays, so now these changes of IR picked up by module are filtered by electronics in the module and as of signaling the changes in IR, A pulse is generated by the module. This pulse is of duration 5sec by default.

So whenever a human crosses the sensing region of module, it generates a pulse of 5 sec.  So presence of human is detected by IR rays by this module.

The motion sensor module will have two pots or presets one of them is to adjust the sensing region of the module and the second is for varying the time of high pulse output on detection of motion. The duration of pulse can be adjusted from few second to few minutes. You can understand more about it by this PIR sensor circuit.

The LDR in this circuit works as a variable resistor. The resistor of the LDR changes  based on the light intensity. When the light falling on the LDR is low the resistance of the LDR will be high. When the light falling on LDR is high the resistance across terminals of LDR will be very low compared to low light resistance.


Low Level Requirements


Components Required
Hardware:

ATMEGA32

Power supply (5v),

AVR-ISP PROGRAMMER

100uF capacitor

LED

220Ω, 1KΩ resistors

LDR(Light Dependent Resistor)

100KΩ pot or preset,

Any motion sensor module (HC-SR501)

2WATT LED

TIP122 transistor.

Software:

Atmel studio 6.1

Progisp or flash magic
